Q-and-A (#999)
decentralized-identity/sidetree: docs/Q-and-A.md

First we need to understand [what does an ID system gain from a blockchain](what-does-an-id-system-gain-from-a-blockchain). In brief: it's an oracle for entering events into a chronology. That's exactly what we use the Bitcoin network for. In its most primitive sense, we use Bitcoin to enter in events in a chronology that nodes sort of watch for and compute so they all can understand the state of every ID that's anchored in Bitcoin. So it's very important. 

So why would we pick Bitcoin versus some other blockchain?

Well because we're not actually concerned with any of the super sexy smart contracts, and other stuff. Not to say that there's less interesting stuff in Bitcoin, but we just don't care about features like that, which are not applicable for us. What we most care about is entering stuff in the most immutable, hardened record imaginable and right now, that's Bitcoin. It's pretty hard to argue that isn't Bitcoin, so that's why we use it, is because it has those attributes and it suffices, it does exactly what we need it to do.\
[Source: What bitocin Did 231](https://www.whatbitcoindid.com/wbd231-daniel-buchner)

## *Q: What do I need to trust in Sidetree?

> {TBW}

Reviewer: maybe remove the TBWs from this PR and add them later?

Author: Yes, I will do that: either write the answer or delete the question

Author: Done, the TBW that are still in the PR are checks of what has been written. Unanswered question have been moved to QA-candidates.md.

      - [JSON Web Key](./Glossary.md#json-web-key)
      - [Key](./Glossary.md#key)
      - [Merkle tree](./Glossary.md#merkle-tree)
      - [Normative](./Glossary.md#normative)
      - [Non-normative](./Glossary.md#non-normative)
      - [Payload](./Glossary.md#payload)
      - [Public Key Infrastructure](./Glossary.md#public-key-infrastructure)
      - [Race condition](./Glossary.md#race-condition)
      - [Root of trust](./Glossary.md#root-of-trust)
      - [Secret](./Glossary.md#secret)
      - [Self Sovereign Identity](./Glossary.md#self-sovereign-identity)
      - [Subject](./Glossary.md#subject)
      - [Transfer](./Glossary.md#transfer)
      - [Transferable identifier](./Glossary.md#transferable-identifier)
      - [Trust-over-IP](./Glossary.md#trust-over-ip)
      - [Validator](./Glossary.md#validator)
      - [Verifiable Credential](./Glossary.md#verifiable-credential)
      - [W3C DID](./Glossary.md#w3c-did)
      - [WebAssembly](./Glossary.md#webassembly)
      - [(Digital Identity) Wallet](./Glossary.md#-digital-identity--wallet)

## Knowledge you should be confidently applying
- The definitions above
- W3C DIDs
- Public private key pairs

> - Bitcoin Improvement Protocols: BIP32, BIP39, BIP44, BIP47, BIP49, BIP84, BIP174

Reviewer 2: presumably ion-specific

Author: OK, will trim it down

Author: I've cut out the BIPs line

## *Q: What is Sidetree?
Sidetree is a protocol for creating a scalable decentralized public key infrastructure ([DPKI](./Glossary.md#public-key-infrastructure)) networks that can run atop of any existing decentralized ledger system (e.g. Bitcoin) and be as open, public, and permissionless as the underlying ledger they utilize.

#### **Q: Why only a protocol, why scalable, why decentralized, why a ledger, why permissionless, why open and public?
1. Sidetree is a _protocol_ because we need it to be multi applicable. Implementers will be provided with software tools and toolkits and the protocol has both `normative` and non-normative guidelines.
2. The _scalability_ feature is needed because of the astronomical numbers that are associated with digital identifiers, the numerous life events of each identifier and the mulitple use of each individual identifier. Every individual, group or thing on earth can have multiple identifiers associated with them.
3. Privacy and guarding control over are the main drivers for the deer wish to _decentralize_ identifiers. If you don’t like being tracked and you don’t like anybody else controlling your identity, decentralization is the way to go. 

> 4. A global _ledger_ is needed as a single source of truth.

Reviewer 2: A single global ledger is not needed for a Sidetree implementation. Some sidetree implementations make this choice (e.g., did:ion) while other Sidetree implementations make more ad-hoc choices (e.g., did:orb).

Author: thx, I just your exact wording under point 4

5. Permissioned identifiers are limited to a certain domain of application. Sidetree does not want to confine itself and will be as _permissionless_ as the underlaying ledger.
6. Lastly Sidetree needs to be open and public and at the same the protocol and its applications need to hide and protect all sensitive identity related data. This seems to contradict each other. However in Sidetree it is doable. Cryptography and the protocol safeguard privacy and the _open public_ characteristic offers availability and inclusion at the same time.
(_@henkvancann_)

## **Q: What is the setting of sidetree?
The protocol allows users to create _globally unique, user-controlled identifiers_ and manage their associated metadata, all _without the need for centralized authorities_ or trusted third parties. The syntax of the identifier and accompanying data model used by the protocol is conformant to that defined by W3C Decentralized Identifiers. Implementations of the protocol can be codified as their own distinct DID Methods and registered in the W3C DID Method Registry.

## *Q: What is in the name 'Sidetree'?

> The name “Sidetree” combines two hints as to its technical inspirations and superpowers. Each Sidetree network functions as a kind of identity-specific “sidechain” periodically pinned to an underlying chain in much the same way that so-called “Layer 2 Networks”.  These include the Lightning network running atop Bitcoin.\

Reviewer 2: should rename all references to chains, ledgers, blockchains to anchoring system.

Author: OK, I will do this over the next few days and offer a new PR? Because it needs some additional explanation, because people might expect chains, ledgers and blockchains mentions and I have to explain that we call it an anchoring system and for a good reason.

(_@bumblefudge_)

## **Q: How is the inner working of Sidetree?
<img src="../www/diagrams/architecture.png" alt="Architecture of Sidetree" border="0" width="400">

#### ***Q: Why have the concept of index files?
It would be ideal to be able to fetch metadata about the batched operations efficiently, without needing to download the entire batched operation. This design is needed for the implementation of "light nodes".

## *Q: What are the main components of a sidetree system?
The figure below illustrates the three primary components of a Sidetree-based DID system:

> 1. Single source of truth

Reviewer 2: "Single source" is more the language of a public blockchain implementation.

Author: Changed into : 1. Single point of definition

2. Safe-guarded recording of events
3. Access to (proofs of) stored data with a time stamp
<img src="./images/sidetree-system.png" alt="System components of Sidetree" border="0" width="400">

#### **Q What exactly does a "system" mean in Sidetree?
It is a DID overlay network. 

> - The underlying anchoring system that serves as the global anchoring and linear sequencing system for DID operations.

Reviewer 2: "global" is an implementation choice.

Author: capito, have changed it

[Source: What bitocin Did 231](https://www.whatbitcoindid.com/wbd231-daniel-buchner)

## **Q:  Why use Sidetree?
It is a DIDComm layer (2); which is layer 1 agnostic and uses Layer 1 very efficiently. Sidetree does not require trusted intermediaries, centralized authorities, special protocol tokens, or secondary consensus mechanisms, while preserving the core attributes of decentralization and immutability of the underlying ledger systems it is implemented on.
_(@henkvancann)_

## **Q: What is so unique to Sidetree?
Current approaches that utilize these ledger systems to create decentralized identifier networks suffer from severely limited transactional volumes and other performance issues. Sidetree is a ‘Layer 2’ protocol that runs atop decentralized ledger systems.\

> Sidetree has a very small footprint on Settlement Layer 1 of the trust-over-IP model. It stashes multiple layer 2 identity transactions into one layer 1 transaction; it's "Lightning-Network-like" in Bitcoin.

Reviewer 2: It's not clear that the reader would be aware of the trust-over-IP model in a Sidetree Q&A (particularly in the general section).

Author: You're right, for the time being, I've thrown ToIP out completely and rephrased. Let's briefly discuss what to list as the unique features in the general section during the WG meeting.

(_@bumblefudge_)

##  **Q: How does Sidetree match the `trust-over-ip` model and in the `W3C DID standardization`?
[Trust-over-IP](#trust-over-ip):
- Sidetree's goal is to offer a scalable decentralized public key infrastructure
- Layer 1 (settlement layer): blockchain agnostic and databases to register identities and settle 'transactions' between between, `DDO`s, and `VC`s, Sidetree implementations use bitcoin and ethereum in 2021.
_(@henkvancann)_
- Layer 2 (communication layer): Examples are DID:ION and DID:ORB.
- Layer 3 (transaction layer): {TBW prio 2}
- Layer 4 (application layer): {TBW prio 3}
_(@henkvancann)_

##  *Q: Who is Sidetree? Is it a company or a not for profit?

> Sidetree sits under the *Decentralized Identity Foundation*, [DIF](https://identity.foundation), and within that in the *Identity and Discovery* Workgroup.

Reviewer 2: Sidetree is in the Sidetree WG of DIF.

Author: changed, thx again

- [The Sidetree release process](https://github.com/decentralized-identity/sidetree/blob/master/docs/release-process.md)
- [The Sidetree coding style guide](https://github.com/decentralized-identity/sidetree/blob/master/docs/styleguide.md)

# Q&A section Sidetree operational

## *Q:  Where can I download Sidetree?
On (sub)page(s of) [github](https://github.com/decentralized-identity/sidetree)

##  *Q: Where can we find the code and how could a coder get started?
The homepage on github [README.md](../README.md) pretty much sums up all the possibilities to download the available code and how developers can engage in the development process currently. We welcome contributions.

##  **Q: What are the external dependencies of Sidetree?
_I hear ya: "Sidetree is able to do all this **without requiring** trusted intermediaries, centralized authorities, special protocol tokens, or secondary consensus mechanisms, while preserving the core attributes of decentralization and immutability of the underlying ledger systems it is implemented on." But what does Sidetree require instead?_

Sidetree is dependent of:

> 1. Proper IPFS data management and Identity and Access Management via API keys?

Reviewer 2: A content addressable storage layer (e.g., IPFS).

Author: thx, changed: 1. A content addressable storage layer (e.g., IPFS)

2. Reasonable fees and confirmation-times on layer 1

> 3. Mining and governance of the layer 1 blockchain it settles on.

Reviewer 2: An anchoring system - mining is not applicable to all anchoring systems.

Author: True, thx, changed: 
Consensus, transaction validation and governance in general of the layer 1 blockchain it settles on.

_(@henkvancann)_

## *Q: Could Sidetree work for edge computers that need self sovereign identity? How to (selectively) share control with the owners of the device?
What a Sidetree based DID schema like ION provides you to do, is the ability to create identifiers that aren't just for humans or companies, you can create identifiers for intangible, non-living things, like a package. So instead, I can go get a DID for my package and I could put the service endpoint to point to GitHub. From there, I can go scan ION and find all the packets and all the IDs in the system that declare themselves to be say packages and create a decentralized version of npm where I'm no longer reliant on npm happening to exist or to believe my packet is worth indexing. I can create that index myself. I can present the same sort of userinterface you would see on `npm`, but I don't need a centralized identity in the middle of that.\
[Source: What bitocin Did 231](https://www.whatbitcoindid.com/wbd231-daniel-buchner)\

# Q&A section Root of trust

## **Q: What does an ID system gain from a blockchain?

> Because there's lots of bullshit going around about people using blockchains for all sorts of nonsense. I would actually harken back to what Satoshi first called Bitcoin before it was blockchain, which was **timechain**. It turns out that `PKI` backs identifiers. An analogy of what one is, is the DNS system.

Reviewer 2: > Because there's lots of bullshit going around about people using blockchains for all sorts of nonsense.

Suggest rewording for Q&A.

Author: Reworded and outside citation of Daniel: "To start off: there are lots of questionable implementations of blockchains."

[Source: What bitocin Did 231](https://www.whatbitcoindid.com/wbd231-daniel-buchner)

## *Q: So why would we pick Bitcoin versus some other blockchain, like Ethereum or Hyperledger?
Sidetree is settlement layer agnostic. There are different reasons to use either one of those platforms. For ION example we argue that because we're not actually concerned with any of the super sexy smart contracts. What we most care about is entering stuff in the most immutable, hardened record imaginable and right now, that's Bitcoin. It's pretty hard to argue that isn't Bitcoin, so that's why we use it, is because it has those attributes and it suffices, it does exactly what we need it to do. [Source: What bitocin Did 231](https://www.whatbitcoindid.com/wbd231-daniel-buchner).

> There are also Sidetree implementations on Ethereum and Hyperledger Fabric:

Reviewer 2: And there is also an ad-hoc network variation called orb: https://github.com/trustbloc/orb

Author: Sure :), added.

## *Q: What is Sidetree?
Sidetree is a protocol for creating a scalable decentralized public key infrastructure ([DPKI](./Glossary.md#public-key-infrastructure)) networks that can run atop of any existing decentralized ledger system (e.g. Bitcoin) and be as open, public, and permissionless as the underlying ledger they utilize.

#### **Q: Why only a protocol, why scalable, why decentralized, why a ledger, why permissionless, why open and public?
1. Sidetree is a _protocol_ because we need it to be multi applicable. Implementers will be provided with software tools and toolkits and the protocol has both `normative` and non-normative guidelines.
2. The _scalability_ feature is needed because of the astronomical numbers that are associated with digital identifiers, the numerous life events of each identifier and the mulitple use of each individual identifier. Every individual, group or thing on earth can have multiple identifiers associated with them.
3. Privacy and guarding control over are the main drivers for the deer wish to _decentralize_ identifiers. If you don’t like being tracked and you don’t like anybody else controlling your identity, decentralization is the way to go. 

> 4. A single global ledger is not needed for a Sidetree implementation. Some sidetree implementations make this choice (e.g., did:ion) while other Sidetree implementations make more ad-hoc choices (e.g., did:orb).

Author: true, I will change the wording

5. Permissioned identifiers are limited to a certain domain of application. Sidetree does not want to confine itself and will be as _permissionless_ as the underlaying ledger.
6. Lastly Sidetree needs to be open and public and at the same the protocol and its applications need to hide and protect all sensitive identity related data. This seems to contradict each other. However in Sidetree it is doable. Cryptography and the protocol safeguard privacy and the _open public_ characteristic offers availability and inclusion at the same time.
(_@henkvancann_)

## **Q: What is the setting of sidetree?
The protocol allows users to create _globally unique, user-controlled identifiers_ and manage their associated metadata, all _without the need for centralized authorities_ or trusted third parties. The syntax of the identifier and accompanying data model used by the protocol is conformant to that defined by W3C Decentralized Identifiers. Implementations of the protocol can be codified as their own distinct DID Methods and registered in the W3C DID Method Registry.

## *Q: What is in the name 'Sidetree'?

> The name “Sidetree” combines two hints as to its technical inspirations and superpowers. Each Sidetree network functions as a kind of identity-specific “sidechain” periodically pinned to an underlying chain in much the same way that so-called “Layer 2 Networks”.  These include the Lightning network running atop Bitcoin.\

Author: it's "as", as in 'like' :)

## *Q: What are the main components of a sidetree system?
The figure below illustrates the three primary components of a Sidetree-based DID system:
1. Single point of definition
2. Safe-guarded recording of events
3. Access to (proofs of) stored data with a time stamp
<img src="./images/sidetree-system.png" alt="System components of Sidetree" border="0" width="400">

#### **Q What exactly does a "system" mean in Sidetree?
It is a DID overlay network. 
- The underlying anchoring system that serves as the anchoring and linear sequencing system for DID operations.
- The Sidetree nodes themselves, which interact with the anchoring system to anchor operations, fetch and replicate data from the CAS network, and process operations in accordance with the protocol deterministic ruleset.
- An integrated Content-Addressable Storage (CAS) network layer Sidetree nodes use to distribute and replicate DID operation files.

<img src="./images/layers-of-SSI-interop.png" alt="Layers of SSI interopability" border="0" width="600"> 

> ## For who is Sidetree?

Author: Thx, me neither, good suggestion, sounds a lot better!

Sidetree is a systematic, carefully-engineered protocol that loosens that coupling between blockchain anchor-points and DID networks anchored to them, replacing a 1-to-1 relationship with a 1-to-many relationship. Depending on the use-case and implementation strategies chosen, the protocol can optimize for scalable performance, for developer-friendly ergonomics and software development kits (SDK), for the portability of DIDs and networks of DIDs across multiple anchoring systems, and even for high availability in contexts where a global blockchain cannot be relied upon directly.\
(_@bumblefudge_)

##  **Q: How does Sidetree match the `trust-over-ip` model and in the `W3C DID standardization`?
The DIF interoperability model looks like this:

> <img src="./images/layers-of-SSI-interop.png" alt="Layers of SSI interopability" border="0" width="600"> 

Reviewer 3: nit: Formatting looks weird here as the image is in the middle of the sentence

1. A content addressable storage layer (e.g., IPFS)
2. Reasonable fees and confirmation-times on layer 1
3. Consensus, transaction validation and governance in general of the layer 1 blockchain it settles on.
4. Ongoing development and blockchain maintenance for safety of the records now and in the future.
5. {TBW prio 2}
_(@henkvancann)_

##  **Q: In what can we find the efficiency booster that Sidetree promises to be?
Sidetree nodes that participate in writing operations into the overlay network do so by **anchoring** Content-Addressable Storage (`CAS`) (e.g. IPFS) references to **aggregated** bundles of operations in an underlying ledger.

##  ***Q: "Process operations in accordance with the protocol deterministic ruleset." What does this mean?
Read this [section](https://identity.foundation/sidetree/spec/#late-publishing) that illustrates a DID owner, Alice, creating forks by creating and anchoring operations in the past that she does not expose to the network. Known as _Late Publishing_ of a DID operation.\
This type of processing guarantees only one `fork` of a DID’s state history can ever be valid.

##  *Q: What would you see as the main drawback of Sidetree?

> There aren't many. Sidetree has Self-Certifying Identifiers, however they are non-transferable. {Right?}

Reviewer 3: Suggestions:

- For any given Sidetree based DID method, a user has to trust a Sidetree node operation, or run a Sidetree node themselves
- Batching introduces a throughput / latency tradeoff: the more infrequent batches are sent to the underlying ledger, the more latency there is compared to a direct ledger transaction
- Using multiple CAS files improves scalability but can slow down read operation depending on how the observer is implemented

_(@henkvancann)_

##  *Q: How can it be one solution, fit for more DIDs? 
DID Methods based on the Sidetree protocol all share the same identifier format. The unique identifier segment of a Sidetree-based DID, known as the DID Suffix, is derived by using the Hashing Process to generate a hash value from the canonicalized Create Operation Suffix Data Object. The DID Suffix is cryptographically bound to the initial PKI state of the DID, which means Sidetree DIDs are also self-certified.

## *Q: Where you would need something quite different than Sidetree to solve a similar problem?
In a private situation with no self sovereignty. A Certification Authority in combination with a federated setup could do, like it has done the past decades. But in that SSI become Self Service Identity at best, because the Identifiers are owned and controlled by a third party.
_(@henkvancann)_

## **Q: How does Sidetree scale

> This image speaks a thousand words:\

Reviewer 3: nit: formatting of the image looks weird

Author: I agree, but it is what it is :)

<img src="./images/Sidetree-file-structure.png" alt="Sidetree file structure" border="0" width="500">
Sidetree is a lean and mean structure. The content of Sidetree mainly consists of JSON files of hashes, signatures and other cryptographical proofs and pointers. And it connects to other highly scaleable technologies, like IPFS and blockchains.\
<img src="./images/sidetree-logo.png" alt="Sidetree logo" border="0" width="100" align="right">
The importance of this structure for scaleability is rewarded in the Sidetree-logo.

## ***Q: How does Sidetree keep data internally consistent over nodes?
In brief: By using **delta-based** Conflict-Free Replicated Data Types. _(@henkvancann)_

> Despite early availability on the market, `BX` tools did not gain much user appreciation because of semantic issues. A user should clearly understand the behavior of synchronization procedures implemented by a tool. The majority of algebraic BX frameworks are _state-based_. Synchronizing operations take the states of models before and after update as input, and produce new states of models as output. This design assumes that model alignment, i.e., discovering relations (deltas) between models,

Reviewer 3: nit: a link to the abbreviation section would be helpful for BX

Author: done

The rules and parameters of the Sidetree protocol may change in the future, resulting in new versions of the specification. 
#### Version Segment Definitions:
1. Major: Major protocol evolution, with breaking protocol advancements so large they warrant incrementing the major version.
2. Minor: Critical updates, protocol forking changes, or security patches that require all nodes to upgrade.
3. Patch: Non-critical changes that do not require nodes to upgrade.

#### New Version Activation
New versions of the protocol, or modifications to parameter values by implementers, muat be activated at a specified _Ledger Time_ so **all nodes can remain in sync by enforcing the same ruleset and parameters** beginning at the same logical starting point.\ 
All transactions that occur after the specified Ledger Time will adhere to the associated version’s rules and parameters until a newer version of the protocol is defined and implemented at a future Ledger Time.\
New Version Activation is **necessary for Minor and Major version segments**; the ones with breaking protocol advancements, and protocol forking changes, or security patches.
_(@henkvancann)_

> ## Could Sidetree work with be pruned or charded blockchains?

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Could Sidetree work with pruned or sharded blockchains?
```

No, any node needs a full copy of the blockchain that serves as a settlement layer 1. The reason is ordering of operation on DID is done via consensus of the blockchain.\
_(@henkvancann)_
## How to bootstrap Sidetree on the internet? Is it like fax machine; the more there are the more effective it is?
It's bootstrapped by the first DID method that uses Sidetree under the hood. The more use of those DIDs the more Sidetree gets used.  However, there is no network effect as such from extended use. None-the-less there is a huge network effect when mulitple DID methods are running on Sidetree, because they share the same resolution, protocol and file structure in the CAS.
_(@henkvancann)_

## What do you need to purchase to operate Sidetree or on sidetree based DIDs like ION?

> But to look up the IDs in ION, you have to have a full node, you've got to have the index of history. So in fact, we're going to be spawning a new reason why people will want to run full nodes, because it actually provides you concrete value you absolutely cannot get any other way. So running a node for us, it's a priority that anyone be able to do it.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In order to look up the IDs in ION, you have to have a full node, you've got to have the index of history. So in fact, we're going to be spawning a new reason why people will want to run full nodes, because it actually provides you concrete value you absolutely cannot get any other way. So running a node for us, it's a priority that anyone be able to do it.
```

So our target hardware has been this little 2017 Intel NUC that I bought for $400, back three years when we started this. This thing is pretty underpowered, it's like a 2017 i5, it's got six gigs of RAM, a half a terabyte hard drive and we're running this thing at full scale, as fast as you could do, even our Azure blades or anything like that. You could run it at home right under your desk! Part of that is running a Bitcoin full node, IPFS, and other things, so anyone should be able to get it started.\
[Source: What bitocin Did 231](https://www.whatbitcoindid.com/wbd231-daniel-buchner)

> ## What do you need to do?

Reviewer 3: Im confused by who the "you" refers to in this case

Author: rephrased this, thx

But I'd say the majority, they believe in decentralizing. The reason they believe in it, is for all the things it does, not necessarily how we're doing it, but what it does. What it does for people, what it enables for the business, and so on. I personally believe Sidetree needs to be censorship resistant and tamper-evasive as possible. So that's the reason why I heavily encouraged Microsoft to go this route. But it becomes a humanitarian thing and it's hard to argue with.

The alternative is you could go set up some private permission blockchain or something, but that's only as decentralized as whoever is running those few nodes that gets to decide everything. That's not really something we're interested in, because it's not significantly differentiated from the centralized identity systems we provide today. It's just not something that might be good for people; to get people involved in a system where they could be shut off.

## In what programming languages is Sidetree available?

> In Javascript.

Reviewer 2: Sidetree has also been implemented in Go: https://github.com/trustbloc/sidetree-core-go

Author: Great, thx, added this

So everyone needs to be able to see that event, globally and deterministically, or else someone could masquerade as Alice. They could say, "Well, I have her old key so I'm her." You have to have this sort of linear chronology of what happened when, it's a state machine. So what a blockchain does, really elegantly that we never had before, is it's an oracle for entering events into a chronology. That's exactly what we use it for. In its most primitive sense, we use Bitcoin to enter in events in a chronology that nodes sort of watch for and compute so they all can understand the state of every ID that's anchored in Bitcoin. So it's very important.\
[Source: What bitocin Did 231](https://www.whatbitcoindid.com/wbd231-daniel-buchner)

> ## So why would we pick Bitcoin versus some other blockchain, like Ethereum or Hyperledger?

Reviewer 2: Presumably this one is an ion-specific Q&A. There are also Sidetree implementations on Ethereum and Hyperledger Fabric.

Author: Then I need to adjust the tone of voice, because it's meant as a Sidetree Q-and-A. I have added your input to the Q-and-A.

Because we're not actually concerned with any of the super sexy smart contracts, interesting... Whatever you might call it. Not to say that there's less interesting stuff in Bitcoin, but we just don't care about features like that, that is not applicable for us. What we most care about is entering stuff in the most immutable, hardened record imaginable and right now, that's Bitcoin. It's pretty hard to argue that isn't Bitcoin, so that's why we use it, is because it has those attributes and it suffices, it does exactly what we need it to do.\
[Source: What bitocin Did 231](https://www.whatbitcoindid.com/wbd231-daniel-buchner)

## Does Sidetree use a blockchain?

> Yes, it needs a global blockchain to provide an ordered settlement layer 1 that has reached consensus over the unique representation of the "truth". Sidetree sits on top of this Layer 1, in layer 2 of the `ToIP model` and is blockchain agnostic.\

Reviewer 2: Usage of a "global blockchain" is an implementation choice for a DID method - it is not an inherent property of Sidetree.

Author: Thx Troy, I copied the wording from https://www.whatbitcoindid.com/wbd231-daniel-buchner so could you elaborate on how to change the text that it fits the current state?

Reviewer: I would say instead:
Not exactly-- a Sidetree based on KERI or other consensus mechanisms and roots-of-trust would, in theory, be possible (if not exactly efficient!), and blockchain-like data structures such as Amazon's QLDB would also work.

Author: I've tried to find best of both worlds: 
Yes, it could use a global blockchain to provide an ordered settlement layer 1 that has reached consensus over the unique representation of the "truth". Sidetree sits on top of this Layer 1, in layer 2 of the `ToIP model` and is blockchain agnostic.\
A Sidetree based on other consensus mechanisms and roots-of-trust would, in theory, be possible (if not exactly efficient!), and blockchain-like data structures such as Amazon's QLDB would also work.
